Good morning.
All right. Slide's up there.
Right. Good morning, and welcome to the Social Services and Community Select
Committee. So we have you for half an hour this morning.
So we've got a briefing from the Helen Clark Foundation on New Zealand's aging
population.
So I think we've got Carley and Rachel is there
right? Welcome. If you want to introduce yourself and take it away.
Sure. Thank you. Tena koutou katoa, and thank you for
the invitation to join you today. Called Rachel
Durie-Menaghau, and I'm the head of planning at WSP.
And it's our absolute pleasure to be here with you today to
continue this very important
discussion on how decisions around infrastructure
provision can and must respond to the
transformational demographic shift currently underway
across Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Today's session centers on age-proofing Aotearoa.
I'm just going to do a little bit of an introduction and then pass to Carley, who
will then run through the slides. So this report, as
you know, was prepared in partnership with the Helen Clark Foundation, and it was
first published in October last year.
Since that time, it's gathered
enduring interest.
So it sits within an excellent series prepared by Carley, each which
tackles issues that are fundamental to our collective future and
is deliberately designed to provoke thought, challenge assumptions, and
to stimulate action, which is why it's great to be here with you today talking
it through.
What's been particularly striking about this particular report is the breadth
of engagement that it continues to generate.
Interest has come from policymakers, developers, aged care providers,
local and central government, academia,
general public.
And that interaction, I think, reflects something important, which is that the
response to age-proofing Aotearoa has not been purely emotive, but
it has been practical and solution-focused.
There is a genuine appetite to move beyond the recognition of the issue
towards meaningful implementation.
And in that sense, the timing of today's discussion couldn't be more relevant
given the various aspects of reform and review of the entire
system that are underway.
So in a moment, I'll pass to Carley to run through the
findings. But we'll just close with, this report is
fundamentally about fairness, resilience,
and foresight, and about ensuring that the decisions we take
today create infrastructure, services, and communities that
continue to support dignity, participation, and
wellbeing across the life course of all fellow New
Zealanders.
Thank you.
Thanks, Rachel. Tena koutou katoa. I'm Carley Mercy.
I'm deputy director at the Helen Clark Foundation and also a WSP
fellow, which means I work with WSP on a couple of long-form policy
reports each year on infrastructure matters.
And this one I'm really excited about.
It was the one I think most of all the reports we've done so far, where I was just
like, "Oh, wow, we've got this really big thing coming.
We're not really very well prepared." So I'm really happy to be talking to
you about it today. I understand you've had Paul Spoonley come in-
Yeah
... last year to talk to you about demographics stuff. So I won't labor that stuff.
I'll just maybe go quite quickly through the demographics to refresh you a wee bit.
But then I'll launch into talking about the various types of infrastructure that I
think we need to be most worried about with the bulge of aging
population. So if we could just start the slideshow, please.
So we've got this profound and demographic shift happening over time.
So if
I think about how old I'll be in 2051, which is in
25 years, well, you can work it out yourself how old you'll be.
I'm 51 now, so I'll be 76 then.
But at that time, there'll be double the number of people over 65 as there are
today. By the time I'm 85, so in 2060,
thereabout, there'll be about three or four times as many people aged 85 and
over as there are today.
Potentially as many as four times as many.
So you and I and all of us who are around that age will be
looking to use infrastructure such as hospitals and
aged care facilities, and accessible housing,
that is currently not in existence at the levels that we need it and for
which there's no real clear plan to build in a
hurry. So we've got this really profound demographic shift happening.
We don't have a strategic plan to match it, is essentially the message I wanted to
get across to you guys today.
The numbers on the graph are quite sobering because there's no roadmap.
And there's going to be significant and compounding shortages, I think, in housing
and aged care facilities and care infrastructure in particular.
Those are the three areas that I really
felt that there were big lacks in. And then there's this extra area, which is urban
design, which I think is an opportunity area for us as well.
So I'll cover those four areas.
We've got increasing life expectancy, declining birth rates.
We've got internal migration pressures, international migration pressures,
and that's led to this thing of structural aging.
If you put the next slide on, please.
So structural aging essentially means that the population's shifting from a
pyramid shape with lots of young people at the bottom to a pyramid more an
obelisk shape with fewer young people at the bottom and a lot more older people
at the top.
It's quite hard to read, but the bottom right-hand pyramid is 2053, so about,
what's that, 25 years away or so. You can see that top line just getting
older and older. And the bottom line is slowly getting shorter.
So there's fewer people to essentially pay for the infrastructure that the older
people are going to need. And you'll have heard all the Treasury's concerns about
that, I'm sure.It's a non-reversible
trend, and we're sharing it with all OECD countries, essentially.
Some of them are further ahead than us.
We can slow it down with immigration, but we can't stop it, so
it's going to keep going.
And by the way, it's not necessarily a bad story.
Having everyone live longer and happier and healthier lives is a great story.
I'll be thrilled to have a long, happy life.
But we just need to be planning for it, so it's just a systems challenge and
opportunity, but it's not a crisis.
But it could become one if we don't treat it as something we have to
proactively address. Yeah.
Next slide, please.
So the total number of older people is really relevant in terms of the
infrastructure and facilities we need, obviously, but the proportion of the older
population is relevant in terms of how we actually pay for it.
So currently, about 17% of the population's over 65.
By 2078, that'll move to around 30%, or one third of the population.
So that will mean fewer people to pay for more services
and more infrastructure. Next slide, please.
I'm trying to rattle through this demographic stuff because I know you probably
know this stuff quite well.
Regional disparities, this map on the left is now, and the
next one is 2048, so just showing the percentage of older people in
each area over time. Some areas like Tasman, Nelson,
Marlborough, are already what's known as hyper-aged, so they've already got more
than 20% of people over 65. And those areas are going to be
growing older faster and will have around 30% of people over
65 by 2048, within two decades. And then
other areas like Auckland, Christchurch, Wellington, they're growing older much
slower as a percentage. But in terms of overall numbers, they're growing older
quite quickly. So Auckland, for example, within 20 odd years, will have an
extra couple of hundred thousand people over 65.
So the challenges for the big cities is more about the absolute number of
people. I think for the smaller places, it's the challenge
that there are
fewer people of working age to pay for the infrastructure.
Growth
has funded development in a lot of those smaller places, and that's not necessarily
going to be the case anymore because a lot of those places are getting both older
and smaller at the same time. So that's going to be the real challenge for the
infrastructure for the smaller places.
Yeah, next slide, please. We'll start on the different areas of infrastructure.
So housing
is obviously a secure and healthy home is the biggest determinant of a healthy old
age, so we really need to get housing right first and foremost.
We already have a really significant housing shortage.
We need nearly half a million homes extra by 2043, according
to Stats New Zealand, and we're falling short by about 5,000 or 10,000 homes a year
at the moment.
In terms of an aging population, what I was most worried about was the shortage of
smaller homes,
accessible houses as well,
both public-owned and on the private market.
We don't have enough existing accessible housing to accommodate
older people with disabilities, let alone to cover future demand.
So in terms of disabilities, I think something like between 17 and
19% of the population counts as disabled in the general
population. But once you get over 65, it's more like 60%.
Of course, not all of those people have mobility problems, but a lot of them do.
So essentially, as the population gets older, we're going to need more and more
accessible housing, and we are already really struggling with demand.
Housing poverty is also another challenge.
From the statistic here, significantly more people will be renting in the future,
and renting housing, of course, is generally lower quality than
privately owned homes, and that has an impact on public health and overall health
overall, and then ends up putting more pressure on
at the health infrastructure end. So it is a system.
The housing affects public health, which affects how much
health infrastructure we need. So really starting to think of that as a system
and work out how we can improve things at this end to influence our
infrastructure demands over time is going to be really essential.
Yeah, so the report calls for more public housing to be built, especially for older
people, the smaller disability-friendly housing,
especially.
And we should also be thinking, and I think this is just as important, if not more
important, about incentives for private landlords to make their housing more
accessible and to build more smaller housing as well.
I think the market will eventually respond but is responding too
slowly and
probably needs a little push along to make sure that that happens in time.
Yeah.
Also, councils need to be proactively using planning and zoning rules to encourage
a variety of functional and affordable housing as well.
So that's another part of the picture, is what local councils are doing in that
space. Next, we're going to move on to aged care facilities.
I'm trying to rattle through this so we have time for questions.
Yeah, big pinch point here as well.
So there are currently really big gaps in aged care with people falling through
the cracks. Obviously, you would have heard about that in this group.
They either end up in care earlier than they would have liked or miss out on care
entirely. There's going to be around a 12,000 bed shortage by
2032, according to one estimate, and
that's obviously going to get worse over time with the bulging
population change. So some areas,
particularly rural areas and some of the smaller regions, are really badly served
compared to the bigger cities, especially with the private, the big six
companies. It's obviously much easier for them to set up in the big areas because
it's easier for them to get suppliers and caterers.
They have a much bigger profit margin there.
So there's not
as much motivation for them to move to some of the smaller rural
areas. You might be waiting for a bed nearly three times as long on the West Coast
as in the Manawatu, for example.
So we need to increase capacity and beds.
A big part of the problem is the funding models around aged care facilities, and I
know there's a ministerial advisory group looking at that at the moment, which is
fantastic. So we just need to make sure that any recommendations from
that group are backed up with sufficient money to actually increase capacity
dramatically, especially in those smaller areas.
AndAustralia's made really big changes in the space, which we could
really learn from in terms of funding.
And they've got a new capital assistance fund, for example, that helps build
facilities in rural areas and more remote areas.
So I think we need to be really thinking about proactively doing that rather than
just waiting for the market to sort that out, because I don't think the incentives
are quite right for them at the moment to do that adequately.
Yeah. And the other big piece of this picture is investing more and better in
services such as home and community support.
If we can help people more with basic things like personal care, essential
home maintenance, things like even changing light bulbs, helping people to mow
the lawns, that can keep them at home for much longer, and that then takes pressure
off the aged care facilities.
And it's a heck of a lot cheaper as well.
If we look at the next slide,
just these were some figures I pulled out of various government reports.
But in-home care support can cost as little as $20 a day.
Obviously, if you're doing it as well as you can, you could spend a lot more than
that. But if you compare that to aged care facilities, 180, and
hospital care, 1,000 a day, you really want to be investing as much as you can
at that really cheap end because it's just simple economic sense.
Just thinking of it as a systems challenge, obviously every agency has its own
budget line, which makes it harder.
Wings may not want to spend a whole lot extra on helping people with changing light
bulbs or so on. But if we know it's helping the health system to
reduce the demand in terms of building new hospitals or whatever, it's really worth
thinking about how we can sort of break down those silos a wee bit.
So
yeah, I think given the Treasury's concerns in their most
recent fiscal report about how we're going to
pay for superannuation and so on
with a smaller tax base as the workforce shrinks, I think treating this
whole thing as a systems challenge is going to be the biggest thing that we can do
to get this right.
We're still going to need to be building more aged care facilities.
We're still going to need to build more hospital care.
There is not a world, I think, in which we don't still have to do that.
But we can reduce the amount at which we have to do that by thinking about those
home care supports and other public health interventions that can keep people
healthier for longer and keep them out of hospital. Yeah.
So which brings us to health. Next slide, please.
What time is it? Okay, cool.
In terms of health, it's clear that an aging population will put a
lot of extra demand on health facilities or hospitals.
Obviously, we're not really meeting current demand at the moment for health
infrastructure. Hospital investment has slowed to near historic lows over the
last decade.
The National Infrastructure Plan, which Te Whatu Ora put out recently,
also emphasized that health care is right up the top of their list of priorities,
and that's because of the aging population.
So we need to be thinking about that, of course.
What I really notice from this report is I don't think we are really planning
strategic-- Well, I can say that we're not really planning strategically at this
point to meet increasing health needs in areas that are rapidly
aging. There's no plan that
this is the area that's going to have this number of older people, and that this is
what that means in terms of what health infrastructure we need in 20 years, and
then therefore, we're going to start building a hospital now so that it's ready in
time. It's not being planned at that level yet.
There's been a lot of improvement in infrastructure planning in New Zealand over
the last wee while. Te Whatu Ora has been doing a huge amount of work on this,
and it's great to see huge steps forward.
Health New Zealand put out its first infrastructure plan last year and so on.
Those are great steps forward, but they're also quite initial things.
So we really need to be pushing ahead with building that up and making that more
detailed and ensuring that we've got really good population planning at a
regional and local level, and then backing that specific
plan up with a specific plan for health infrastructure and aged care facilities
region by region.
And obviously, the other side of that is increasing things like use of
technology and digital healthcare and all those good things that we've been doing
in New Zealand. But ramping that up is probably going to be really important
as well. Preventative medicine, public health, keep people healthier for longer.
Yep. So next slide.
This is the area of opportunity, I guess, which is
to design cities and towns to be age-friendly.
Age-friendly city programs help communities adapt structures such as
buildings and roads and pedestrian spaces and social infrastructure like parks and
libraries and so on to better meet the needs of older people.
We need cities to be accessible, walkable, connected, and ideally green and
leafy. And those things just are great for everyone, not just older people,
obviously. Just make cities nicer to live in.
But also it's just public health in terms of if you can
reduce falls, that's the biggest cost in terms of older
people having accidents.
All those things then feed fewer and fewer people into
the health system and mean that people can stay at home and live
healthy lives at home for much longer.
So
yeah, to do that, essentially, we need attention to planning and zoning,
which is really a local council thing.
But I think from a central government level, we could be focusing on the
planning bill, for example, that's coming up at the moment.
I think that it would be great if that required local councils to be
thinking about population planning in their long-term plans and their long-term
infrastructure plans as well. That isn't a requirement at the moment.
So that would be a really great and pretty simple
step I think we could take to be trying to make cities
more age-friendly. So there's also this international WHO
age-friendly cities thing, and there's 36 cities in New Zealand that are signed up
to that and working with the Office of Seniors towards being more age-friendly.
But-They're not really well-funded or well-supported, and
the research suggested that for some places it might be a little bit of a
box-ticking exercise. So really supporting regions to be doing that
work would be great as well from a central government
level. And then there's road safety. Next slide, please.
Sorry, this is a really
fast tour of all the different areas- And I'm just downloading an awful lot of
information, but I'll try and give you some time for questions.
New Zealand is obviously really heavily dependent on driving, and that's not going
to change in a hurry. So, when older New Zealanders can't drive,
they
get cut off from essential services and from social connections, and so on, that
make life worth well. And losing your ability to drive as an older person is one of
the big life transitions and can be really distressing.
So along with improving public transport and community shuttle services, we need to
be helping older New Zealanders to keep driving safely for as long as
possible. So, there's a whole lot of road safety interventions
recommendations in the report that I put in there that could really help with this.
And also there's a safety issue here, because older drivers and
passengers are more likely to be injured if they're in an accident.
So without intervention, we're going to end up with 33% more fatal and serious
driver injuries by 2063, just because people who get injured
in an accident are more likely to be seriously injured because they're older.
So that's another doom and gloom, sorry.
Yeah. If we move on to the last slide.
This is just the key recommendations for the report, and there are many in the
report. We try and design our reports to be easy,
practical policy solutions that can just be picked up and run with.
Able to spend time thinking about issues that
government advisors might not have time to do.
I've worked in central government, I know, and you're just focused on doing
whatever you need to do. You don't always have time to zoom out and do big picture
thinking. So we really try and come up with recommendations that can be
just
cut and pasted
where possible. So,
the areas of infrastructure I've highlighted in the presentation need obviously
significant thought and investment.
We need to be planning better for population change in general, and I know Ko Tu
came out with a report about that yesterday, looking not just at infrastructure but
wider across the whole of society.
So I think population planning is a real big one.
We'd recommend creating a national population plan, also investing in
improving data accuracy, requiring spatial plans at the
central, regional, local levels to incorporate thinking on aging.
And also just noting that our work on
planning the country's infrastructure to respond to an aging population is quite
piecemeal at the moment. Our best chance of making the most strategic
cost-efficient decisions is really to work across central and local government
to identify cost savings strategically across budget lines.
I think the overarching message I'd like to get across is we need to be innovative,
bold, proactive. We need to be thinking about this stuff now.
We can't just wait for the next crisis to come.
We need to actually have a plan.
If we can invest in areas now that save us money later,
we need to be thinking about things that will stick down the track.
So working across party lines, as I'm sure you're sick of being
told.
So we need an evidence-based long-term plan that does not change regularly.
I really see this issue of aging demographics along with climate adaptation as
this superannuation moment of our generation.
Can we all pull together and agree something that will stick for the long-term
benefit of New Zealanders? And again, to think of it as an
opportunity rather than a crisis.
So to work together because all of us are going to get old whether we want to or
not. In fact, yeah, we probably want to get old, I'm sure, rather than not get old.
So that's a privilege. I hope that was a useful whistle-stop tour of
the report, and I have left eight minutes, so-
There's plenty of time for questions.
Thank you very much, Kelly. Very interesting, very topical-
Mm. Yep
... briefing.
And certainly something we've been turning over in my committee, so we appreciate
you coming in and presenting your report today. Got lots of questions.
I will try and get through as many of them as we can. First one, Lawrence.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much, Kelly, for coming, and thank you for this.
I'm going to just ask the big picture question.
So you had the recommendation right in the end in terms of cross-party agencies.
Mm-hmm.
Would that be what you consider as the starting point?
So for example, one of the things I appreciate about your report is you
include other jurisdictions and examples from other countries.
Yeah.
What are some of the dos and don'ts?
Do other countries do everything together in one go?
Do they do piecemeal? Do they just go with a cross-party agency first and then
work down their list? And what are some of the don'ts?
I know there's Japan, for example.
Yeah.
They tried to invest in robotics. That did not work out.
So that's a don't.
Yeah.
If you really want to-
Well, it hasn't worked yet, maybe rather than a don't.
Or maybe wait for other countries to invest lots of money and then take advantage
of what they've come up with. But Japan did invest for 20 years in robotics,
and it hasn't helped with aged care
yet, because it's far too complicated to predict the movements of a
patient.
But they might find that they can do it in the future, in which case, we might want
to invest in buying the technology that they've spent years investing in. But no.
Interesting.
One of the things that Japan's done that has been really good, though, is they've
worked really hard to centralize their cities and their communities as they've got
older. So they've tried to move people away from the peripheries and into
areas, incentivize people to move close to services, essentially,
so they don't have to be paying for lots of infrastructure around the periphery.
And that's a real issue in New Zealand especially.
We've got a long, thin country and far fewer people than Japan, so we've got a
lot fewer people to pay for a lot more infrastructure.
And the margins that we're spending on the periphery of that is
significant. So the more we can consolidate our spending
to centralized areas, the better, and that doesn't necessarily work with the way
our culture is or the way our countries are set up.
But I think-The more we can do that, the better.
Transport's another one that I think other countries have done
quite well. Transport on demand is really good.
So Timaru's been trying that in New Zealand, and quite successfully, I think, with
a service called My Way. So you ring up, and
there's essentially a minibus that will come and pick you up wherever you are and
take you wherever you are for the standard bus fare.
And that works really well in terms of the number of people using
public transport has gone up a lot.
And I think that's really been helpful for older people to
access services, and I think that's essential if we want to keep people in their
home as long as possible, which we do, and to a large extent, we're already doing
quite well in New Zealand. But we're going to have to do even better
as
the bulge of older people bites and impacts on our
aged care facilities. So yeah.
Flint, Michigan is an example of how not to do that, by the way.
What Japan has done in terms of centralization, working with communities to try and
to make them more condensed. Flint, Michigan was less an aging
population issue and more a de-industrialization issue.
But they've sort of imposed movement on people and saying,
"We're not going to provide services to this suburb.
We're only going to provide services to this suburb," and that's left a whole lot
of people really impoverished and sitting in suburbs by themselves with no one else
around, and crime's gone up and all that sort of stuff.
So working with communities on how we do this is going to be really, really
important to make it work.
Mm-hmm.
Willie-Jean?
Thank you.
So much in the report.
I was a Whanau District Councilor before coming into parliament.
Lovely.
And I'm really interested in the role that
local government has played in the past for the provision of pensioner
housing. But then as the focus for local
government has changed over the years from including wellbeing
to, not to bricks and mortar-
Mm-hmm
... but that doesn't include housing and so on.
Just whether you've got any thoughts on that local
government role.
And then the other point was on page
85, talking about poverty among older people.
And I can see your recommendations there, but I just wondered if you
had any more
sort of thoughts about what the difference between what it currently
is and what it probably needs to be in order to address the
poverty issues that you're seeing.
We're seeing more elderly people come forward for food support.
Mm-hmm.
Skipping meals because that is...
Or their shopping's changed because that's the only sort of discretionary-
Mm
... income that they have. So you talk about housing and rents and so
on being one lever.
Mm.
But yeah, if you've just got more detail
around what that might
a- actually look like in terms of changes.
Yeah. So in pensioner housing, I can't remember the date, but I think it was around
20 odd years ago, we stopped requiring local councils to
provide pensioner housing, and so some cities still have some that they
keep maintained, and others don't invest in it at all.
So
traditionally, local government was responsible for the pensioner housing, and
central government was responsible for state housing in general.
So that's kind of a lap now, and I
don't know the best way to change that, whether it's just
to focus on the public housing and make sure that that takes into account
smaller, more accessible housing and expects plans for that bulge in
older populations. Or whether it's to require
councils to go back to providing that pensioner housing or not.
But I do know from personal experience that that pensioner housing can be really,
really important to people. I've an older friend in Dunedin who
was only able to find accommodation through existing housing that was
there, but it's a dwindling base, I think-
Mm. Mm
... because they're not required to anymore, so yeah.
And I suppose councils are feeling torn because-
Mm-hmm
... like you said, the lack of strategy and plan.
Mm-hmm.
The increasing need and feeling like they need to respond-
Yeah
... to the kaumatua in their community.
Yeah.
Yeah. Has council's still sort of looking at the
portfolio that they have,
and whether to increase it or to continue to maintain it?
Yeah.
And also funding crunches for local councils-
Yeah
... stream at the moment with the infrastructure stuff
especially coming down. All the infrastructure's
now aged and needing replaced, and a lot, in large part, falls to local
councils who, with the dwindling rate space in part as well for some places.
So yeah, that's kind of a bit of a wicked problem to unpick, but
some kind of strategic plan around that would be quite important. Yeah.
Maureen.
Sorry.
Sorry. And on the-
No, we were just waiting
... the poverty issue. Yeah. So the poverty issue is a
really big one. So some people, New Zealand is one of the best
places to grow old, and for people who are well off, they're
the happiest demographic in New Zealand, having a great old time.
But there's sort of multiple levels of poverty for some people who
are having a really, really terrible time.
So I guess it's addressing those issues for some people
and really
putting a lot of effort into helping those people that are facing multiple
disadvantage is the way out there.
Yeah. So basically-
Last-
Mostly good life. Some people, really terrible life
Last question from Maureen. Unfortunately, we do have more, but just to-
Yeah. Sorry.
How do you tackle that? I'll just make a comment about the
councils and pensioner housing.
Yeah.
A lot of those were funded by suspensory loans that were provided by the
government.
Right.
But then we also had the development of retirement villages, which kind of stepped
into the market, and they were filling the need.
Yeah.
And even some of those retirement village developers are
saying to potential customers that in
20 years or 30 years, these will be residential
rentals.
Mm.
Because they're anticipating that the aging population is going to
taper off. So are we going through a bubble at the moment?
Mm.
And I was trying to work it out on the stats, but
how long is it going to take before we're through the worst of, I
won't say worst, but- ... the biggest bulge in that bubble
before that tapers off?
Well, I don't think we're ever going to get to the point where we don't have a
significant portion of our
population being older because
people are just living longer and longer at the moment.
I guess if people stop living longer, that that might have an impact on it.
But it's going to stick at at least 30% for a long, long time
because
people are just living longer, and they're not being replaced in terms of birth
rates. So,
in terms of absolute numbers, I guess, of our population, that'll depend a lot on
our overall population plan, like whether we're planning to grow the population or
not over time using immigration. So that kind of comes
back to why we need the population plan, just so we can actually predict those
things long term. Yeah.
Look, thanks Carly and Rachel very much for the presentation this morning.
My pleasure.
A very important topic, and one we have a lot of interest, a lot more questions,
including from me, but- ... we'll pick it up another time.
Thanks so much for inviting us along. It's great to be here.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
Thank you.